.. Make single backticks produce code
.. default-role:: code

:author: Aaron Meurer
:email: asmeurer@quansight.com
:institution: Quansight

=========================
 Array API Specification
=========================

.. class:: abstract

   The array API standard (https://data-apis.org/array-api/) is a common
   specification for Python array libraries, such as NumPy, PyTorch, CuPy,
   Dask, and JAX.

   This standard will make it straightforward for array-consuming libraries,
   like scikit-learn and SciPy, to write code that uniformly supports all of
   these libraries. This will allow, for instance, running the same code on
   the CPU and GPU.

   This proceedings paper will cover the scope of the array API standard,
   supporting tooling which includes a library-independent test suite and
   compatibility layer, what work has been completed so far, and the plans
   going forward.

.. class:: keywords

   Python, Arrays, Tensors, NumPy, CuPy, PyTorch, JAX, Dask

Introduction
============

The design of array API considers three primary stakeholders: Array libraries,
array library consumers, and end users. *Array libraries* are Python libraries
that implement an array object and a namespace that conforms to the array API
standard. Examples of array libraries are NumPy, CuPy, and PyTorch. *Array
library consumers* are libraries that implement functionality against the array
API, consuming any conforming array library. Examples of array library
consumers are SciPy and scikit-learn. *End users* are people such as
scientists, data scientists, machine learning practitioners, as well as other
higher level libraries, which make use of array libraries and array consuming
libraries to solve problems with their data.

In the present paradigm, array library consumers are written against a single
array library (typically NumPy). Using the algorithms they provide with other
array libraries is impossible. This is because, firstly, the array library is
hard-coded into the functions with things like `np.<function>`, where `np` is
`numpy`. Secondly, even if `np` could be swapped out with a different array
library, different libraries provide different APIs, so the code would be
unlikely to run without modification.

However, if we examine the three stakeholders, we see that each stakeholder
adds its own value to the workflow. Array libraries provide an array object
and corresponding functions that are optimized against a certain set of
use-cases and hardware. Array consumer libraries provide useful
implementations of higher level algorithms. End-users provide the actual data
and problem to be solved. The current paradigm is misaligned, because it is
end-users who are the best suited to choose which array library best fits
their needs. The may prefer a battle-tested, highly portable library like
NumPy, or a library that has been optimized for deep learning workflows like
PyTorch, or a library that can scale to multiple machines like Dask. But if
they also want to make use of a high level array consumer library, that choice
of array library will be forced on them by whatever array library it is
implemented against.

The array API specification corrects this misalignment by specifying a uniform
API for array libraries to provide. Array consumer libraries can then be
written against this one uniform API, allowing their functionality to work
with arrays from any conforming array library. End users are then able to
chose their array library without that choice restricting their choices of
array consumer libraries. The usability improvement from different array
libraries themselves having more consistent APIs and semantics additionally
provides a benefit to the whole ecosystem.

Motivating Example
------------------

TODO

History of the Consortium
=========================

TODO

Goals and Non-Goals
===================

The array API specification has the following goals:

- Make it possible for array-consuming libraries to start using multiple
  types of arrays as inputs.

- Enable more sharing and reuse of code built on top of the core
  functionality in the API standard.

- For authors of new array libraries, provide a concrete API that can be
  adopted as is, rather than each author having to decide what to borrow
  from where and where to deviate.

- Make the learning curve for users less steep when they switch from one
  array library to another one.

Additionally, the specification has several non-goals:

- Making array libraries identical so they can be merged. Each library will
  keep having its own particular strength, whether it's offering functionality
  beyond what's in the standard, performance advantages for a given use case,
  specific hardware or software environment support, or more.

- Implement a backend or runtime switching system to be able to switch from
  one array library to another with a single setting or line of code. This may
  be feasible, however itâ€™s assumed that when an array-consuming library
  switches from one array type to another, some testing and possibly code
  adjustment for performance or other reasons may be needed.

- Making it possible to mix multiple array libraries in function calls. Most
  array libraries do not know about other libraries, and the functions they
  implement may try to convert "foreign" input, or raise an exception. This
  behavior is hard to specify. It is better to require the end user to use a
  single array library that best fits their needs. Note that specification of
  an interchange protocol is within scope, but interchange between array
  libraries is only done explicitly in the specification.

Design Principles
=================

The array API standard has been developed with several design principles in
mind. The most important principle is that the standard only specifies
behavior that is already widely supported by most existing array libraries.
The goal is to minimize the number of backwards incompatible changes required
for libraries to support the specification. This in particular leaves many
things out of scope if they are not already supported by all major array
libraries.

The standard has been developed with following core principles:

* Don't assume any dependency other than Python itself. Different array
  libraries have independent codebase, and link against varying backend
  libraries depending on what hardware they support. There is no common array
  layer and array libraries do not need to know about each other. Data can be
  interchanged between libraries using a protocol which does not require a
  dependency.

* Libraries may implement behaviors beyond what is specified. Except in a few
  special instances where avoiding bad behavior is desired, the spec does not
  disallow libraries to implement additional functions, methods, keyword
  arguments, and allow additional input types. The onus is on array library
  consumers to ensure they write portable code (the strict minimal
  `numpy.array_api` module is designed to help here).

* APIs should support accelerators. This means not either not specifying or
  making optional behaviors that are difficult to implement performantly.

* In a similar vein, APIs should support JIT compilers. For example, the type
  of any function's output should only depend on the types of the inputs.

* The API is primarily functional (e.g., `xp.any(x)` instead of `x.any()`).
  Outside of Python "dunder" operators, there are only a few method defined on
  the array object. Functional APIs are already preferred for must array
  libraries, functional code is easier to read, especially for expressions
  with many mathematical functions and operations, and functions
  make it clearer that an operation returns a new array rather than mutating
  the input array in-place, which is avoided in the specification (see the
  next bullet point).

* Copy-view behavior and mutability is not required. Array libraries may
  implement mutation but the behavior of in-place mutation with views is not
  guaranteed by the spec. Operations producing "views" on existing data is
  considered an implementation detail and should not be relied on for
  portability across libraries. The `out` keyword is omitted from API
  definitions.

* No value-based casting. The output data type of any function or
  operation should depend only on the input data type(s), not the array
  values.

* No dimension dependent casting. The output data type of any function or
  operation should function independently of the input array dimensionality.
  This also means that 0-D arrays are fully supported. Scalars as a separate
  concept are not specified.

* Functions that can easily be implemented in terms of existing standardized
  functions do not necessarily need to be standardized.

* Functions with data-dependent output shapes are optional, since graph-based
  libraries like JAX and Dask cannot easily support them. This includes
  boolean indexing, `nonzero()`, and the `unique_*` functions.

* Type annotations are defined in a basic way in the spec, but libraries may
  extend them. Input types are designed to be as simple as possible. For
  example, functions are only required to accept `array` objects. Accepting
  "array like" types like lists of numbers, as NumPy does, is problematic
  because it complicates type signatures, and calling `asarray()` at the top
  of every function adds additional overhead. However, these type signatures
  are not strict:  libraries may choose to accept additional input types
  outside of those that are specified.

* The accuracy and precision of numerical functions are not specified beyond
  very basic IEEE 754 rules.

Scope
=====

The scope of the array API specification includes:

- Functionality which needs to be included in an array library for it to
  adhere to this standard.
- Names of functions, methods, classes and other objects.
- Function signatures, including type annotations.
- Semantics of functions and methods, i.e., expected outputs and dtypes of
  numerical results.
- Semantics in the presence of `nan`'s, `inf`'s, and empty arrays (i.e. arrays
  including one or more dimensions of size `0`).
- Casting rules, broadcasting, and indexing.
- Data interchange. i.e., protocols to convert one type of array into another
  type, potentially sharing memory.
- Device support.

To contrast, the following are considered **out of scope** for the array API
specification

- Implementations of the standard are out of scope. Members of the consortium
  have played a role in helping libraries like NumPy, CuPy, and PyTorch
  implement the standard, but this work has been done independently of the
  standard. In particular, the standard is completely independent of any
  specific implementation and does not make reference to or depend on any
  given implementation or Python library (the `array-api-compat` library has
  been produced as a compatibility layer on top of array libraries such as
  NumPy, CuPy, and PyTorch, but this library is provided only as a helper tool
  for array consumer libraries. It is not in any way required to make use of
  the array API).

- Execution semantics are out of scope. This includes single-threaded vs.
  parallel execution, task scheduling and synchronization, eager vs. delayed
  evaluation, performance characteristics of a particular implementation of
  the standard, and other such topics.

- Non-Python API standardization (e.g., Cython or NumPy C APIs).

- Standardization of dtypes not already supported by all existing array
  libraries is out of scope. This includes bfloat16, extended precision
  floating point, datetime, string, object and void dtypes.

- The following topics are out of scope: I/O, polynomials, error handling,
  testing routines, building and packaging related functionality, methods of
  binding compiled code (e.g., `cffi`, `ctypes`), subclassing of an array
  class, masked arrays, and missing data.

- NumPy (generalized) universal functions, i.e. ufuncs and gufuncs.

- Behavior for unexpected/invalid input to functions and methods.

For out-of-scope behavior, array libraries are free to implement or to raise
an error. It is up to array consuming libraries to ensure they write portable
code that doesn't depend on behaviors outside of the specification. The
`numpy.array_api` implementation, discussed below, can be a useful tool for
this.

Features
========

Data Interchange
----------------

TODO

Device Support
--------------

TODO

Functions and Methods
---------------------

Signatures
~~~~~~~~~~

All function signatures in the specification make use of `PEP 570
<https://peps.python.org/pep-0570/>`_ positional-only arguments for arguments
that are arrays. It should not matter if one library defines, for instance
`def atan2(y, x): ...` and another library defines `def atan2(x1, x2): ...`.
With positional-only arguments, the only way to call the function is by
passing the arguments by position, like `atan2(a, b)`. The specific name given
the arguments by the library becomes separate from the API.

Additionally, most keyword arguments are keyword-only. For example, `ones((3,
3), int64)` is not allowed---it must be called as `ones((3, 3), dtype=int64)`.
This makes user code more readable, and future-proofs the API by allowing
additional keyword arguments to be added without breaking existing function
calls.

All signatures in the specification include type annotations. These type
annotations use generic types like `array` and `dtype` type to represent a
library's array or dtype objects. These type annotations represent the minimal
types that are required to be supported by the specification. A library may
choose to accept additional types, although any use of this functionality will
be non-portable. Functionally, type annotations serve no purpose other than
documentation. Libraries are not required to implement any sort of runtime
type checking, or to actually include such annotations in their own function
signatures. The array API specification does attempt to make any extensions of
type annotations beyond what is already specified by PEPs and supported by
popular type checkers such as Mypy. For instance, including dtype or shape
information in the annotated type signatures is out-of-scope.

Here is an example type signature in the specification

.. code:: python

   def asarray(
       obj: Union[
           array, bool, int, float, complex,
           NestedSequence, SupportsBufferProtocol
       ],
       /,
       *,
       dtype: Optional[dtype] = None,
       device: Optional[device] = None,
       copy: Optional[bool] = None,
   ) -> array:
       ...


Array Methods and Attributes
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

All relevant Python "dunder" methods (e.g., `__add__`, `__mul__`, etc.) are
specified for the array object, so that people can write array code in a
natural way using operators. Every dunder method has a corresponding
functional form (e.g., `__add__` <-> `xp.add()`). For consistency, this is
done even for "useless" operators like `__pos__` <-> `positive()`. Operators
and the corresponding functions behave identically, with the exception that
operators accept Python scalars (see "type promotion" below), and functions
are only required to accept arrays.

In addition to the standard Python dunder methods, the standard adds a some
new dunder methods:

- `x.__array_namespace__()` returns the corresponding
  array API compliant namespace for the array `x`. This solves the problem of
  how array consumer libraries determine which namespace to use for a given
  input. A function that accepts input `x` can call `xp =
  x.__array_namespace__()` at the top to get the corresponding array API
  namespace `xp`, whose functions are then used on `x` to compute the result,
  which will typically be another array from the `xp` library.

- `__dlpack__()` and `__dlpack_device__()` (see the "data interchange" section above).

Functions
~~~~~~~~~

Aside from dunder methods, the only methods/attributes defined on the array
object are `x.to_device()`, `x.dtype`, `x.device`, `x.mT`, `x.ndim`,
`x.shape`, `x.size`, and `x.T`. All other functions in the specification are
defined as functions. These functions include

- Elementwise functions. These include functional forms of the Python
  operators (like `add()`) as well as common numerical functions like `exp()`
  and `sqrt()`. Elementwise functions do not have any additional keyword
  arguments.

- Creation functions. This includes standard array creation functions
  including `ones()`, `linspace`, `arange`, and `full`, as well as the
  `asarray()` function, which converts "array like" inputs like lists of
  floats and object supporting the buffer protocol to array objects. Creation
  functions all include a `dtype` and `device` keywords (see the "Device"
  section above). The `array` type is not specified anywhere in the spec,
  since different libraries use different types for their array objects,
  meaning `asarray()` and the other creation functions serve as the effective
  "array constructor".

- Data type functions are basic functions to manipulate and introspect dtype
  objects.

- Linear algebra functions. Only basic manipulation functions like `matmul()`
  are required by the specification. Additional linear algebra functions are
  included in an optional `linalg` extension (see below).

- Manipulation functions such as `reshape()`, `stack()`, and `squeeze()`.

- Reduction functions such as `sum()`, `any()`, `all()`, and `mean()`.

- Four new functions `unique_all()`, `unique_counts()`, `unique_inverse()`,
  and `unique_values()`. These are based on the `np.unique()` function but
  have been split into separate functions. This is because `np.unique()`
  returns a different number of arguments depending on the values of keyword
  arguments. Functions like this whose output type depends on more than just
  the input types are hard for JIT compilers to handle, and they are also
  harder for users to reason about.

Note that the `unique_*` functions, as well as `nonzero()` have a
data-dependent output shape, which makes them difficult to implement in graph
libraries. Therefore, such libraries may choose to not implement these
functions.

Data Types
~~~~~~~~~~

Data types are defined as named dtype objects in the array namespace, e.g.,
`xp.float64`. Nothing is specified about what these objects actually are
beyond that they should obey basic equality testing. Introspection on these
objects can be done with the data type functions (see above).

The following dtypes are defined:

- Boolean: `bool`.
- Integer: `int8`, `int16`, `int32`, `int64`, `uint8`, `uint16`, `uint32`, and
  `uint64`.
- Real floating-point: `float32` and `float64`.
- Complex floating-point: `complex64` and `complex128`.

Additionally, a conforming library should have "default" integer and
floating-point dtypes, which is consistent across platforms. This is used in
contexts where the result data type is otherwise ambiguous, for example, in
creation functions when no dtype is specified. This allows libraries to
default to 64-bit or 32-bit data types depending on the use-cases they are
aiming for. For example, NumPy's default integer and float dtypes are `int64`
and `float64`, whereas, PyTorch's defaults are `int64` and `float32`.

See also the "Type Promotion" section below for information on how dtypes
combine with each other.

Broadcasting
------------

All elementwise functions and operations that accept more than one array input
apply broadcasting rules. The broadcasting rules match the commonly used
semantics of NumPy, where a broadcasted shape is constructed from the input
shapes by prepending size-1 dimensions and broadcasting size-1 dimensions to
otherwise equal non-size-1 dimensions. Broadcasting rules are independent of
the input array data types or values.


Indexing
--------

Arrays should support indexing operations using the standard Python getitem
syntax, `x[idx]`. The indexing semantics defined are based on the common NumPy
array indexing semantics, but restricted to a subset that is common across
array libraries and does not impose difficulties for array libraries
implemented on accelerators. Basic integer and slice indexing is defined as
usual, except behavior on out-of-bounds indices is left unspecified. Multiaxis
tuple indices are defined, but only specified when all axes are indexed (e.g.,
if `x` is 2-dimensional, `x[0, :]` is defined but `x[0]` may not be
supported). A `None` index may be used in a multiaxis index to insert size-1
dimensions (`xp.newaxis` is specified as a shorthand for `None`). Boolean
array indexing (also sometimes called "masking") is specified, but only for
instances where the boolean index has the same dimensionality as the indexed
array. The result of a boolean array indexing is data-dependent, and thus
graph-based libraries may choose to not implement this behavior.

Integer array indexing is not specified, however a basic `take()` is specified
and `put()` will be added in the 2023 version of the spec.

Note that views are not required in the specification. Libraries may choose to
implement indexed arrays as views, but this should be treated as an
implementation detail by array consumers. In particular, any mutation behavior
that affects more than one array object is considered an implementation detail
that should not be relied on for portability.

As with other APIs, extensions of these indexing semantics, e.g., by
supporting the full range of NumPy indexing rules, is allowed. Array consumers
using these will only need to be aware that their code may not be portable
across libraries.

It should be noted that both 0-D arrays (i.e., "scalar" arrays with shape `()`
consisting of a single value), and size-0 arrays (i.e., arrays with `0` in
their shape with no values) are fully supported by the specification. The
specification does not have any notion of "array scalars" like NumPy's
`np.float64(0.)`, only 0-D arrays. Scalars are a NumPy-only thing, and it is
unnecessary from the point of view of the specification to have them as a
separate concept from 0-D arrays.

Type Promotion
--------------

.. figure:: dtype_promotion_lattice.pdf

   The dtypes specified in the spec with required type promotions, including
   promotions for Python scalars in operators. Cross-kind promotion is not
   required and is discouraged.

Elementwise functions and operators that accept more than one argument perform
type promotion on their inputs, if the input dtypes are compatible.

The specification requires that all type promotion should happen independently
of the input array values and shapes. This is a break from the historical
NumPy behavior where type promotion could vary for 0-D arrays depending on
their values. For example (in NumPy 1.24):

.. code:: python

   >>> a = np.asarray(0., dtype=np.float64)
   >>> b = np.asarray([0.], dtype=np.float32)
   >>> (a + b).dtype
   dtype('float32')
   >>> a2 = np.asarray(1e50, dtype=np.float64)
   >>> (a2 + b).dtype
   dtype('float64')


This behavior is and bug prone and confusing to reason about. In the array API
specification, any `float32` array and any `float64` array would promote to a
`float64` array, regardless of their shapes or values. NumPy is planning to
deprecate its value-based casting behavior for NumPy 2.0 (see below).

Additionally, automatic cross-kind casting is not specified. This means that
dtypes like `int64` and `float64` are not required to promote together. It
also means that functions that return floating-point values, like `exp()` or
`sin()` are not required to accept integer dtypes. Array libraries are not
required to error in these situations, but array consumers should not rely on
cross-kind casting in portable code. Cross-kind casting is better done
explicitly using the `astype()` function. Automatic cross-kind casting can
result in loss of precision, and often when it happens it indicates a bug in
the code.

Single argument functions and operators should maintain the same dtype when
relevant, for example, if the input to `exp()` is a `float32` array, the
output should also be a `float32` array.

For Python operators like `+` or `*`, Python scalars are allowed. Python
scalars cast to the dtype of the corresponding array's dtype. Cross-kind
casting of the scalar is allowed in this specific instance for convenience
(for example, `float64_array + 1` is allowed, and is equivalent to
`float64_array + asarray(1., dtype=float64)`).

Optional Extensions
-------------------

In addition to the above required functions, there are two optional extension
sub-namespaces. Array libraries may chose to implement or not implement these
extensions. These extensions are optional as they typically require linking
against a numerical library such as a linear algebra library.

- `linalg` contains basic linear algebra functions, such as `eigh`, `solve`,
  and `qr`. These functions are designed to support "batching" (i.e.,
  functions that accept matrices also accept stacks of matrices as a single
  array with more than 2 dimensions). The specification for the `linalg`
  extension is designed to be implementation agnostic. This means that things
  like keyword arguments that are specific to backends like LAPACK are omitted
  from the specified signatures (for example, NumPyâ€™s use of `UPLO` in
  `eigh`). BLAS and LAPACK no longer hold a complete monopoly over linear
  algebra operations given the existence of specialized accelerated hardware.

- `fft` contains functions for performing Fast Fourier transformations.

Current Status of Implementations
=================================

Two versions of the array API specification have been released, v2021.12 and
v2022.12. v2021.12 was the initial release with all important core array
functionality. The v2022.12 release added complex number support to all APIs
and the `fft` extension. A v2023 version is in the works, although no
significant changes are planned so far. Most of the work around the array API
in 2023 has been to focus on implementation and adoption.


Strict Minimal Implementation (`numpy.array_api`)
---------------------------------------------------

The experimental `numpy.array_api` submodule is a standalone, strict
implementation of the standard. It is not intended to be used by end users,
but rather by array consumer libraries to test that their array API usage is
portable.

The strictness of `numpy.array_api` means it will raise an exception for code
that is not portable, even if it would work in the base `numpy`. For example,
here we see that `numpy.array_api.sin(x)` fails for an integral array `x`,
because in the array API spec, `sin()` is only required to work with
floating-point arrays.

.. code:: pycon

   >>> import numpy.array_api as xp
   <stdin>:1: UserWarning: The numpy.array_api submodule
   is still experimental. See NEP 47.
   >>> x = xp.asarray([1, 2, 3])
   >>> xp.sin(x)
   Traceback (most recent call last):
   ...
   TypeError: Only floating-point dtypes are allowed in
   sin

In order to implement this strictness, `numpy.array_api` uses a separate
`Array` object from `np.ndarray`.

.. code:: python

   >>> a
   Array([1, 2, 3], dtype=int64)

This makes it difficult to use `numpy.array_api` alongside normal `numpy`. For
example, if a consumer library wanted to implement the array API for NumPy by
using `numpy.array_api`, they would have to first convert the user's input
`numpy.ndarray` to `numpy.array_api.Array`, perform the calculation, then
convert back. This is in conflict with the fundamental design of the array API
specification, which is for array libraries to implement the API and for array
consumers to use that API directly in a library agnostic way, without
converting between different array libraries.

As such, the `numpy.array_api` module is only useful as a testing library for
array consumers, to check that their code is portable. If code runs in
`numpy.array_api`, it should work in any conforming array API namespace.

array-api-compat
----------------

As discussed above, `numpy.array_api` is not a suitable way for libraries to
use `numpy` in an array API compliant way. However, NumPy, as of 1.24, still
has many discrepancies from the array API. A few of the biggest ones are:

- Several elementwise functions are renamed from NumPy. For example, NumPy has
  `arccos()`, etc., but the standard uses `acos()`.

- The spec contains some new functions that are not yet included in NumPy.
  These clean up some messy parts of the NumPy API. These include:

  .. TODO: How complete do we need to be here?

  - `np.unique` is replaced with four different `unique_*` functions so that
    they always have a consistent return type.

  - `np.transpose` is renamed to `permute_dims`.

  - `matrix_transpose` is a new function that only transposes the last two
    dimensions of an array.

  - `np.norm` is replaced with separate `matrix_norm` and `vector_norm`
    functions in the `linalg` extension.

  - `np.trace` operates on the first two axes of an array but the spec
    `linalg.trace` operates on the last two.

There are plans in NumPy 2.0 to fully adopt the spec, including changing the
above behaviors to be spec-compliant. But in order to facilitate adoption, a
new library `array-api-compat` has been written. `array-api-compat` is a
small, pure Python library with no hard dependencies that wraps array
libraries to make the spec complaint. Currently `NumPy`, `CuPy`, and `PyTorch`
are supported.

`array-api-compat` is to be used by array consumer libraries like scipy or
scikit-learn. The primary usage is like

.. code:: python

   from array_api_compat import array_namespace

   def some_array_function(x, y):
       xp = array_api_compat.array_namespace(x, y)

       # Now use xp as the array library namespace
       return xp.mean(x, axis=0) + 2*xp.std(y, axis=0)

`array_namespace` is a wrapper around `x.__array_namespace__()`, except
whenever `x` is a NumPy, CuPy, or PyTorch array, it returns a wrapped module
that has functions that are array API compliant. Unlike `numpy.array_api`,
`array_api_compat` does not wrap the array objects. So in the above example,
the if the input arrays are `np.ndarray`, the return array will be a
`np.ndarray`, even though `xp.mean` and `xp.std` are wrapped functions.

While the long-term goal is for array libraries to be completely array API
compliant, `array-api-compat` allows consumer libraries to use the array API
in the shorter term against libraries like NumPy, CuPy, and PyTorch that are
"nearly complaint".

`array-api-compat` has already been successfully used in scikit-learn's
`LinearDiscriminantAnalysis` API
(https://github.com/scikit-learn/scikit-learn/pull/22554).

Compliance Testing
------------------

The array API specification contains over 200 function and method definitions,
each with its own signature and specification for behaviors for things like
type promotion, broadcasting, and special case values.

In order to facilitate adoption by array libraries, as well as to aid in the
development of the minimal `numpy.array_api` implementation. A test suite
has been developed. The `array-api-tests` test suite is a fully featured test
suite that can be run against any array library to check its compliance
against the array API. The test suite does not depend on any array
library---testing against something like NumPy would be circular when it comes
time to test NumPy itself. Instead, array-api-tests tests the behavior
specified by the spec directly.

The array library is specified using the `ARRAY_API_TESTS_MODULE` environment
variable when running the tests.

This is done by making use of the hypothesis Python library. The consortium
team has upstreamed array API support to hypothesis in the form of the new
`hypothesis.extra.array_api` submodule, which supports generating arrays from
any array API compliant library. The test suite uses these hypothesis
strategies to generate inputs to tests, which then check the behaviors
outlined by the spec automatically. Behavior that is not specified by the spec
is not checked by the test suite, for example the exact numeric output of
floating-point functions.

The use of hypothesis has several advantages. Firstly, it allows writing tests
in a way that more or less corresponds to a direct translation of the spec
into code. This is because hypothesis is a property-based testing library, and
the behaviors required by the spec are easily written as properties. Secondly,
it makes it easy to test all input combinations without missing any corner
cases. Hypothesis automatically handles generating "interesting" examples from
its strategies. For example, behaviors on 0-D or size-0 arrays are always
checked because hypothesis will always generate inputs that match these corner
cases. Thirdly, hypothesis automatically shrinks inputs that lead to test
failures, producing the minimal input to reproduce the issue. This leads to
test failures that are more understandable because they do not incorporate
details that are unrelated to the problem. Lastly, because hypothesis
generates inputs based on a random seed, a large number of examples can be
tested without any additional work. For instance, the test suite can be run
with `pytest --max-examples=10000` to run each test with 10000 different
examples (the default is 100). These things would all be difficult to achieve
with an old-fashioned "manual" test suite, where explicit examples are chosen
by hand.

The array-api-tests test suite is the first example known to these authors of
a full featured Python test suite that runs against multiple different
libraries. It has already been invaluable in practice for implementing the
minimal `numpy.array_api` implementation, the `array-api-compat` library,
and for finding presidencies from the spec in array libraries including NumPy,
CuPy, and PyTorch.

Future Work
===========

The focus of the consortium for 2023 is on implementation and adoption.

NumPy 2.0, which is planned for the Q4 2023, will have full array API support.
This will include several small breaking changes to bring NumPy inline with
the specification. This also includes, NEP 50, which fixes NumPy's type
promotion by removing all value-based casting. A NEP for full array API
specification support will be announced later this year.

SciPy 2.0 is also planned, and will include full support for the array API
across the different functions. For end users this means that they can use
CuPy arrays or PyTorch tensors instead of NumPy arrays in SciPy functions, and
they will just work as expected, performing the calculation with the
underlying array library and returning an array from the same library.

Scikit-learn has implemented array API specification support in
`LinearDiscriminantAnalysis` and plans to add support to more functions.

Work is being done on a array API compliance website. (TODO)

There is a similar effort being done by the same Data APIs Consortium to
standardize Python dataframe libraries. This work will be discussed in a
future paper and conference talk.
